---
title: FAQ
description:
---

Where does the name Minimak come from?

: It's a play on the word "minimax" and the "ak" ending of Dvorak (named
after the researcher who designed it) as well as Colemak (another
nod to Dvorak).  Minimax is a contraction for "minimum change,
maximum benefit".  It's unrelated to the game theory algorithm of
the same name.

How fast are you at Minimak?

: See the homepage.  I try to post my QWERTY and Minimak speeds daily.

How long does it take to get up to speed?

: I'm not fully up to speed yet, so I can't say for sure.  You can track
my progress on the homepage, which shows the count of days I've been
using Minimak.  After 9 days with the 12-key layout, I was in the 40-60
wpm range with both Minimak and QWERTY.  That's way better than I
experienced with other layouts.  It's just nowhere near as frustrating.

: However I'm not really a representative case since I've been typing with
precursor designs for some time.

: It took me about six months to get up to 80 wpm with the QGMLWB layout
from carPalx.  I'd estimate Minimak to cut that time to a third.

Which Minimak do you use?

: I'm using the 12-key layout.

Which Minimak do you recommend?

: I think the 8-key layout is the best compromise for most people.  I
like the 12-key layout more for aesthetic reasons (such as moving P out
of an uncomfortable position) than for its actual metrics.  I think
it's further from QWERTY than most will find comfortable, and the 8-key
layout solves the obvious problems with QWERTY.

What are the obvious problems with QWERTY?

: E and T need to be in the home position and should be on the middle
fingers.  J and K have no business in the home position.  The rest is
getting the highest frequency letters within the reach of the middle and
ring fingers and avoiding same finger repetition.

How many people are using Minimak?

: There have been about 70 downloads by November 2012, but I'd guess
only a small fraction of that are active users.  I'm looking forward to
more people trying it out.  It really works.

How long has Minimak been in existence?

: The layout was finalized and launched on October 21, 2012.

I want to learn the 12-key layout as fast as possible.  Should I just learn it directly or use the 4-key steps?

: I can't say with total confidence, but I believe the 4-key route is
quicker.  I need more real world experiences to say for sure.

: If you're absolutely gung-ho, I'd say that the 6-key layout is a good
compromise that gets you there in two steps.  It's explicitly designed
for learning the 12-key layout quickly.  Give it a try.

I already use Dvorak/[layout X].  Should I learn Minimak?

: If you're unsatisfied the effect Dvorak has had on your QWERTY skills,
then I'd consider Minimak.  It's not going to be as easy to learn as
it is for QWERTY users, though.

: Otherwise I'd say no.  As my metrics show, Minimak's value is not that
it's any better than Dvorak, it's that it's significantly better than
QWERTY while helping you keep your QWERTY skills.

Learning a new layout is hard.  If I'm going to go to all that trouble, shouldn't I learn the best possible layout?

: Perhaps.  There's two things wrong with that point of view however.

: First, not all layouts are made equal.  Some are harder to learn than
others, and when you look at what you're getting for it, some are harder
for no good reason.  It's a myth to say you have to learn something hard
to significantly improve your typing experience.  Minimak was created
out of that realization.

: Second, this point of view entirely forgets that every other computer
you will ever use will be QWERTY.  You will be reduced to a crawl
whenever you have to use them unless you meticuously maintain those
skills.  My job requires that I be able to use any computer I'm put in
front of, and alternative layouts took that skill away from me.  It's
just not practical to try to maintain QWERTY skills while using an
unrelated layout on a daily basis.

Is Minimak ergonomic?

: I make no claims about ergonomics.  If the fact that your fingers move
less with Minimak than with QWERTY helps, then that's a side-benefit
and not the intent of the design.

Can Minimak help me type faster?

: Same answer as above.  That may be a side-benefit but it's not the
intent of the design.

How do you come up with your comparison numbers to Dvorak?

: I use the keyboard layout analyzer to compare each layout with Dvorak.
I'm comfortable with the statistics it generates from the _Alice in
Wonderland_ input that it provides, so I use that so others can
reproduce the analysis more easily.  The download has importable maps
for the layout analyzer, which makes loading them easier.

: Once the layout analyzer does its thing, I look at the difference in
the absolute numbers for QWERTY versus Minimak and QWERTY versus Dvorak.
I do this by computing the ratios of the mathematical differences
(minus) from QWERTY for the two competing layouts.  I look at the
reductions in finger distance and same-finger repetition, then use a
weighted average of 2/3 finger distance and 1/3 finger repetition, which
feels right to me.

Are your metrics subjective?

: The numbers themselves are not subjective, but the choice of what
metrics I think are important is.  I think they provide a strong
assessment of goodness of feel, which is the goal of the design.  The
greatest part of it is reduction in finger movement.  While reduction in
finger repetition is also a tangible concern, it is a less consistent
part of the typing experience, hence the lower weight.

: Other people may argue for more sophisticated metrics, but there's
only so much you can try to improve in a minimalistic approach like
Minimak's, so I question the value of trying to satisfy more
sophisticated metrics.  I also question how valuable other metrics
actually are.  At the end of the day, you have to actually be able to
feel the differences and I can only feel finger distance and repetition.

Why compare to Dvorak and not [layout X]?

: I know more people who use Dvorak than any other alternative layout
and it has more OS and hardware keyboard support than any other.

: There are layouts which have better results than Dvorak on my metrics,
notably Colemak.  I don't try to compare to it as well so as not to
confuse things with even more metrics than there already are.  Dvorak
is just a name people can relate to.

How can you call changing 4 keys a layout?

: The numbers speak for themselves.  E and T are so important and are so
misplaced in QWERTY that you can spend enormous amounts of effort trying
to finesse the other 25 keys and still not get the improvement that
moving these two keys gives you.  It may take a bit for that to sink in,
but when it does, you may realize that by some measures, the
4-key layout is the best Minimak layout.

: This is because most people assign a high cost to relearning
keys...high enough that most won't even consider it at all.  If you
associate a high cost with learning keys, then the only keys you'll be
willing to learn have to meet a certain threshold of improvement.  For
some of these high-cost users, the 4-key layout is the only layout that
has enough improvement per key to be considered.

If Minimak is such a great idea, why hasn't anyone come up with it before?

: My theory on this is that as a layout designer, it's only natural to
assume that the only way to replace such a massively successful layout
as QWERTY is to design the best possible layout you can.  And let's face
it, you have to be a real nerd to even think about redesigning your
layout in the first place.  Someone that obsessive is going to resist
the idea of offering less than the best they can come up with.  So the
natural inclination is to start off by throwing away QWERTY and
designing from first principles in the pursuit of a pure optimization
strategy.  After all, we all agree that QWERTY is a terrible layout, so
why use it as a foundation?

: But unless you spend time looking at the improvement you get on a key
by key basis, you may miss an important fact.  That fact is that there
is a dramatic range of impact to the spectrum of key changes.  Even if
you do notice this fact, it's not immediately obvious how it makes a
difference.  But what it means is that when you can make a large
difference with a small number of key changes, an incremental
improvement strategy has a lot of value by lowering the cost of the
learning curve.  This observation is what makes an incremental
improvement strategy favorable to pure optimization, seemingly against
common sense.  At least, that's my take on it.

What are your thoughts on [layout X]?

: First, I'll say that a lot more thought and research has gone into
most of the other layouts to which I'm comparing Minimak.  Minimak is
great for all of the reasons I've outlined, but there are a lot of great
layouts out there as well.

: The carPalx layouts are the result of an amazing amount of modeling.
While I can't say I agree with the particular balancing act he uses for
quantifying a good layout, I can say that I learned the fully optimized
layout and it felt great.  I should also mention that I haven't measured
it against my own metrics, but I'll guess it does very well.  The
designer has done something right.  If we were inventing keyboards for
the first time, I'd be willing to bet one of his layouts is the best.

: Colemak is a better layout for most people though, since it does take
QWERTY into consideration, even if it does fall short of having been
designed for QWERTY.  Colemak scores really well on the metrics I use.
However, I think it is mostly the result of a pure optimization strategy
and doesn't employ the learning principles found in Minimak.

: Colemak also has a set of stepwise intermediate layouts like the
Minimak progression, called [Tarmak].  Because Colemak is a much
different layout from QWERTY, there are more steps (5) and each is more
complex than the Minimak steps, but they in part inspired the Minimak
progression and I believe they speed the learning of Colemak for similar
reasons to Minimak's.

: Dvorak is well-designed, but when compared to Minimak, it seems to
pale a bit.  Minimak offers better metrics for a lower learning curve.

: I found the Workman and Asset layouts interesting and incorporated
some of their ideas.  The big one is that valuing key positions by row
is wrong.  You have to value them by their reachability, which varies by
finger and hand due to the asymmetry of the standard layout.  carPalx
seems to get this wrong.

: That said, I believe that Minimak's approach is both unique and better
than the rest for QWERTY typists (meaning just about all of us) because
of the way it addresses the realities of QWERTY.

Do you have any other keyboarding tricks?

: I use Autohotkey quite a bit for making frequently-used parts of the
keyboard more accessible, such as the arrow keys.  I haven't documented
it, but it's reminiscent of what is described as [home row computing].

: There's also [DreymaR's big bag of keyboard tricks], which has some
interesting ideas (which I haven't used personally, but are still
interesting), most notably the idea of a split-keyboarding on a
regular keyboard by remapping the right side of the keyboard one column
further to the right, and putting punctuation keys in the gap that is
created.  It widens the natural arm position as well as relieving the
pinky of a number of keys it's responsible for and lowers the pinky
distance to the frequently-used Enter key.  These seem like worthwhile
ideas if you don't already have an keyboard which already does these
things like my TypeMatrix does.

[Tarmak]: http://forum.colemak.com/viewtopic.php?id=1467
[home row computing]: http://duartes.org/gustavo/blog/post/home-row-computing
[DreymaR's big bag of keyboard tricks]: http://forum.colemak.com/viewtopic.php?id=1467
