---
title: Home
description:
header: true
---
Minimak - A Layout for the Rest of Us
=====================================

Minimak is a keyboard layout.  It's not software or hardware, it's just
an arrangement of keys on your computer keyboard.  You don't need a new
keyboard to use it, you just need to tell your operating system how to
make the change.  Windows, Linux and MacOS all support software-based
methods of changing your layout.

Minimak is a layout "for the rest of us".  While there are many
alternative keyboard layouts, few if any are designed with the average
user in mind.  Almost all of them expect you to toss out your QWERTY
skills and learn an entirely new layout from scratch.

The fact is, the popular alternatives to QWERTY are non-starters for
most of us.  They were designed with the idea that you wouldn't need
QWERTY after learning a new layout.  But that's just not true.  Even if
you do use a snazzy alternative layout on your computer, you're still
going to need to type on a QWERTY device a good deal of the time,
whether it's a smartphone, tablet or someone else's computer.

Not only that, it's ridiculously hard to learn a new layout.  Do you
remember how hard it was to learn how to touch-type in the first place?
Well, it's still that hard, or harder, to learn another layout.  So why
would you do it?

At this point, most of the advocates against QWERTY will tell you that
QWERTY is tremendously inefficient.  They'll mention how it was designed
by typewriter manufacturers to slow you down, a relic of days lost in
the mists of time.

While this may be true, the vast majority of users users don't care.
QWERTY works well enough once you learn it, and why would you want to
learn another layout when you're still going to have to type QWERTY?  Is
it really going to be so much faster or ergonomic?

I set out to answer the same questions for myself.  After learning not
one but many different layouts, as well as designing several, I can tell
you that my answer to these questions was no, it's not worth it.  That's
why I came up with Minimak.

Minimak isn't a layout that tries to be the best, most ergonomic and
efficient.  Instead, it tries to be the minimal change that only
addresses the worst failings of QWERTY.  The name "Minimak" references
that concept, combined with a nod to Colemak and Dvorak, two other
layouts that inspired it.

There may be no reason to learn an entirely new layout to replace
QWERTY, but there's also no reason you have to be suffer with the worst
parts of QWERTY either.  And yes, QWERTY does suck.

Ok, so how do I get started?
============================

There are some free Windows-based downloads which you can use to do the
remapping for you in the [download](/download) section.  They are
provided AS IS and you should read all of the information on that page
before using them, since remapping your keyboard can cause difficulties
if not done with care.
