First, measure your current typing speed with a site like
[Typeracer](http://www.typeracer.com).  This will give you a point of
reference.

The length of time to gain full proficiency with Minimak varies, but
it's a good bet that it will take a good 4-6 months before you are
typing as fast in Minimak as you normally do.

The recommended way to learn Minimak is to start with [Portable Key Layout](/download#pkl).  Download and unzip it, then run `pkl.exe`.

Half Minimak
============

PKL will show up at the bottom screen in the full Minimak mode.  Go to
the system tray, find the PKL icon (the M in a box from the MiniMak logo),
right-click it and select *Change Layout*.

You're now in Minimak-l.  Minimak-l is the left-hand-only variant which
only switches E, R and T with D, F and G, as in this diagram:

![center]({{urls.media}}/minimak-l.png)

The blue keys are unchanged from QWERTY.  Notice that the yellow and
green keys have just been swapped.

Start by going through some basic exercises that stress the left hand.
You can usually find such exercises in your favorite typing tutor.
See the [download page](/download#tt) for a list of typing tutors.  If
you just want some practice without loading a new program on your
machine, try typing some samples from this [list of left-handed words]
(http://www.rickwalton.com/wordplay/qwertasd.htm).

Practice until you gain some familiarity with the change, say for 15 or
20 minutes.  If you're feeling some confidence at this point, go back to
the Typeracer site and measure your speed again.

If you're able to type at half the speed of QWERTY, then you should try
continuing with Minimak-l through the rest of your day as you work.
You'll be surprised at how fast you can gain proficiency with this
simple change.  You should also start feeling how your
fingers stay on the home row more often and move less.

If you're not able to type at half your normal speed, then don't worry.
Just keep practicing with the typing tutor as time allows.  Don't force
it.  You should only try using Minimak-l as a part of your everyday
computer usage once you've gained a bit of proficiency, otherwise you'll
become frustrated and will be more likely to give up on it.

Don't forget to turn off Minimak-l by pressing both *Alt* buttons when
you're dealing with passwords, **especially** if you're creating a
password.

Once you're ready to start using Minimak-l regularly, don't
let your QWERTY skills lapse.  Remember, the goal isn't to learn a new
layout, it's to learn it while still being able to use other computers
as well.

For this reason, you should alternate between QWERTY and Minimak-l.
Some suggest learning by typing QWERTY for the first 15 minutes of the
day, then switching to Minimak-l.  We suggest a more graduated approach.
Instead, you should do a day on and a day off.  This will allow you to
maintain greater speed with QWERTY and will also give your fingers a
chance to integrate what they're learning while keeping your old skills
as strong as ever.  Still, even with this plan, you will likely see some
drop in your typing performance at the beginning of each day as you make
the switch.

Full Minimak
============

Once you can type with Minimak-l to within 10% of your QWERTY speed, you
are then ready to switch to full Minimak.  Run PKL, and this time, don't
switch to Minimak-l.

You'll find this change more challenging than the first, because more
keys are changed, and not all in a big chunk.  N in particular has moved
out of relation with the keys near it.  Here are the moved keys this
time, relative to Minimak-l:

image

As before, practice for a while until you can type at half your regular
speed.  Don't make Minimak your regular layout until you can.

Once you start using full Minimak, you can stop using Minimak-l
entirely.  It is no longer of any use.  Instead, alternate between a day
of QWERTY and a day of Minimak.

Once you can type Minimak nearly as fast as QWERTY, you're done!

Be sure to share your learning experience with us.  We love successes,
but we want to hear about the failures as well.  Whatever your
experience, please share it with us.
